Docs: sampling page (#975)
lightly-ai/lightly-studio: lightly_studio/docs/docs/concepts_and_tools/sampling.md

# Sampling

Sampling helps you select representative subsets from your dataset. LightlyStudio provides sampling strategies that leverage embeddings to pick diverse, balanced, or otherwise optimized subsets for labeling, training, or review. Use the GUI for quick, one-off sampling. Use the Python API when you need reusable, configurable, or combined sampling strategies in code.

## Prerequisites

Sampling is a premium feature and requires a valid LightlyStudio license key. Set the `LIGHTLY_STUDIO_LICENSE_KEY` environment variable before using sampling features:

=== "Linux/macOS"

    ```bash
    export LIGHTLY_STUDIO_LICENSE_KEY="license_key_here"
    ```

=== "Windows"

    ```powershell
    $env:LIGHTLY_STUDIO_LICENSE_KEY="license_key_here"
    ```

## Sampling in GUI

> Open the export dialog from the `Menu` button in the top-right corner and select `Selection`. The dialog shows a dropdown with all available sampling strategies. Specify the number of samples and the tag name that should be used. [Sampling in Python](#sampling-in-python) lets you explore more sampling strategies and also lets you learn more about how they work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Open the dialog from the `Menu` button in the top-right corner and select `Selection`. The dialog shows a dropdown with available sampling strategies. Specify the number of samples and the tag name that should be used. [Sampling in Python](#sampling-in-python) supports more sampling strategies than available in the GUI and also lets you learn more about how they work.
```

<video autoplay loop muted playsinline controls style="width: 100%;">
  <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/lightly-public/studio/sampling_workflow.mp4" type="video/mp4">

> </video>

Reviewer: Would include the embedding plot showing diversity in the video.

Author: we can adjust this. But we will need to record a new video after the renaming is done anyway.

## Sampling in Python

Each strategy is configured directly from a [`DatasetQuery`](../api/dataset_query.md#lightly_studio.core.dataset_query.dataset_query.DatasetQuery) via [`selection()`](../api/dataset_query.md#lightly_studio.core.dataset_query.dataset_query.DatasetQuery.selection). The sampled items are stored under the tag passed as `selection_result_tag_name`, so you can filter or export them later.

!!! note "Tag names must be unique"

>     `selection_result_tag_name` must be a tag name that does not yet exist in the dataset.

Reviewer: I don't see the need for such a prominent note.

```suggestion
Each strategy is configured directly from a [`DatasetQuery`](../api/dataset_query.md#lightly_studio.core.dataset_query.dataset_query.DatasetQuery) via [`selection()`](../api/dataset_query.md#lightly_studio.core.dataset_query.dataset_query.DatasetQuery.selection). The sampled items are stored under the tag passed as `selection_result_tag_name`, so you can filter or export them later. `selection_result_tag_name` must be a tag name that does not yet exist in the dataset.
```

```py
import lightly_studio as ls

# Load your dataset
dataset = ls.ImageDataset.load_or_create()
dataset.add_images_from_path(path="/path/to/image_dataset")

# Sample a diverse subset of 10 samples.
dataset.query().selection().diverse(
    n_samples_to_select=10,
    selection_result_tag_name="diverse_selection",
)
```

If your dataset has multiple embedding models, pass `embedding_model_name` to specify which one to use. See [`Selection.diverse`](../api/selection.md#lightly_studio.selection.select.Selection.diverse) for the full API reference.

#### Metadata Weighting

Metadata weighting selects samples by treating a numeric metadata field as a score: samples with higher values are preferred. Any float or int metadata field can be used as the weight.

```py
import lightly_studio as ls

dataset = ls.ImageDataset.load_or_create()

# Sample the 5 items with the highest value of a custom "sharpness" metadata field.
dataset.query().selection().metadata_weighting(
    n_samples_to_select=5,
    selection_result_tag_name="sharpest_samples",
    metadata_key="sharpness",
)
```

> 

Reviewer: I would mention how to select samples with a low value instead: Set a negative strength.

```suggestion

# Sample the 5 items with the lowest value of a custom "sharpness" metadata field.
dataset.query().selection().metadata_weighting(
    n_samples_to_select=5,
    selection_result_tag_name="blurriest_samples",
    metadata_key="sharpness",
    strength=-1
)
```

See [`Selection.metadata_weighting`](../api/selection.md#lightly_studio.selection.select.Selection.metadata_weighting) for the full API reference.

> #### Typicality

Reviewer: I would add again that setting a negative strength is powerful: it allows to sample outliers and uncommon samples. 
```suggestion
#### Typicality Sampling and Outlier Sampling
```
... other changes

Typicality is a per-sample score derived from embeddings. Samples that are close to many other samples in embedding space (i.e. "typical" of the dataset) receive a high score; outliers receive a low score. It is computed with `compute_typicality_metadata` and then passed to `metadata_weighting`.

```py
import lightly_studio as ls

# Load your dataset
dataset = ls.ImageDataset.load_or_create()
dataset.add_images_from_path(path="/path/to/image_dataset")

# Compute and store typicality scores as metadata.
dataset.compute_typicality_metadata(metadata_name="typicality")

# Sample the 5 most typical items.
dataset.query().selection().metadata_weighting(
    n_samples_to_select=5,
    selection_result_tag_name="typical_selection",
    metadata_key="typicality",
)
```

If your dataset has multiple embedding models, pass `embedding_model_name` to select which one to use. See [`Dataset.compute_typicality_metadata`](../api/dataset.md#lightly_studio.core.dataset.Dataset.compute_typicality_metadata) for the full API reference.

#### Similarity

> Similarity weighting selects samples based on their embedding similarity to a reference set. First, tag the samples you want to use as the query, then compute per-sample similarity scores with `compute_similarity_metadata`, and finally pass those scores to `metadata_weighting`.

Reviewer: let's call it similarity and not similarity weighting
```suggestion
Similarity-based sampling selects samples based on their embedding similarity to a reference set. First, tag the samples you want to use as the query, then compute per-sample similarity scores with `compute_similarity_metadata`, and finally pass those scores to `metadata_weighting`.
```

```py
import lightly_studio as ls

# Load your dataset
dataset = ls.ImageDataset.load_or_create()
dataset.add_images_from_path(path="/path/to/image_dataset")

# Define a query set by tagging some samples.
dataset[:5].add_tag("my_query_samples")

# Compute similarity to the tagged samples and store it as metadata.
# The method returns the name under which the metadata was stored.
metadata_name = dataset.compute_similarity_metadata(
    query_tag_name="my_query_samples",

>     metadata_name="similarity_to_query",

Reviewer: Would inform about it being optional here and not down below
```suggestion
    metadata_name="similarity_to_query", # optional. auto-generated when omitted.
```
